So now we move towards
really everyone's favorite
part of front end engineering,
making API requests.
Now, I want the record to
show that when I found just
a reasonably sized
collection of dog facts, and
I was using the Fetch API,
I was not trying to make a pun.
I also want the record to show I had
weeks to avoid making this pun and
choosing literally any other dataset,
and I chose to go with it.
So I'm aware, it wasn't intentional,
but I committed to it.
So yes, we will fetch dog facts.
Don't @ me.
Okay, you should have an API,
that's no s there,
I just gotta change that,
but HTTP API localhost 3333.
If for
some reason your API server doesn't work,
I also have a version
of it hosted as well.
They're both options.
So we're gonna use no s,
http://slocalhost:3333.
And this API has some fun features.
Basically, it has query params
that may let you make it worse.
Yeah, what API doesn't need that?
So it has the ability to like add a delay
to it, to have it fail intermittently and
all sorts of fun stuff like that.
So we can recreate bad situations.
But we have that in place.
So if I go over here and we have
the ability to do stuff asynchronously,
we know that from, and
from fetch, give us observables.
Iterating a counter is neat, but
not gonna get you that
promotion you're looking for.
So [LAUGH] let's look
at what this would look
like with an API request like a real API.
So we have this in place and
we've got this fetch button on the page/
Let's go take a look at that UI.
We'll start with this fetch button.
It'll fetch you some dog facts.
Who doesn't like dog facts?
So we'll say fetch.
Which again, I apologize for nothing.
And we'll say from event when they
click on that fetch button this case
One of the interesting things too is,
on one hand,
we're writing vanilla JavaScript.
On the other hand,
knowing exactly what to do and
be able to surgically update the DOM
where we need to is effectively
how a lot of the more recent
front end frameworks work, right?
I care about when these given events
change, and here are the places where you
need to change them in the DOM is how
a bunch of if you've ever looked at those,
what is the fastest frameworks in 2020,
2021?
A lot of them is how effectively
these concepts are being used versus
did something change?
Let me the walk an entire virtual DOM,
right?
And so the ability to just
know what value changed and
know where to change it is
an incredibly powerful idea.
I digress.
So we've got merge map in here.
And so we're saying when
that click comes through,
I don't really care what the event is.
I wanna merge map, right, because what
I wanna do is return a from fetch.
I wanna turn that click
into a fetch request.
If I just use map, it's gonna be like,
yeah, here's an observable,
this we wanted.
No, I wanted my fetch request.
I didn't want an observable.
So we've got this kind of in place here.
So we've got merge map, in this case,
and then I don't really care.
I've attached it to the right button.
I don't care about the event,
I don't care about the target value,
it's not an input field.
If I was doing this on an input field,
I might care about the value.
I don't,
I just care that the button was clicked.
That's all I'm interested in.
And then we've got from fetch.
We'll send it to our endpoint.
And then that we're going to want
to do stuff with because you
know one does not simply
use the Fetch API and
get back an object like get JSON on
a certain perfect library known as JQuery.
Now, one gets a response object,
which they have to call either .json or
.blob or what have you, right?
So not only does fetch need to
merge map into the request, but
with that observable, and let's just put
that return there now before I forget.
With that observable,
we're also gonna need to pipe
that through some things, right?
Cuz fetch, cool, fetch me the response,
response to JSON, so on and so forth.
So in this case, We will say .pipe.
So you think I map or I merge map?
>> Merge map.
>> Why, what's that?
>> Just a map.
>> All right, so we have one vote for
just a map, any votes for merge map?
I heard merge map until somebody
said map and everyone got quiet.
>> Are we expecting
more observables to be-
>> Switch map.
>> We got a switch map.
>> Fetch would not be
returning an observable.
I haven't looked at that function though.
>> So a normal fetch,
what does a normal fetch return?
So we say-
>> Promise.
>> That returns a promise.
Then that response,
response.json is also a promise, right?
So I heard you like observables or
promises, each one.
It's interesting,
it's not wrong to think about.
If you were gonna use a .then, merge
map is probably your best bet, right?
Because the chaining of the observables,
it will basically run
the values if it is observable like
they'll run through from, right?
Or it'll treat it like an observable.
So in this case because
response.json returns a promise
that also needs to get merged mapped also.
Again, the handy mnemonic that I
literally just invented right now
is it If you're gonna use dot
then you'd wanna use a merge map.
So I've got a pipe here and
then we'll merge map, yep.
Response.json, perfect.
You know when Prettier is happy with you
then everything mostly works in this case.
So then from fetch we will subscribe.
I will say, Dog facts should do the trick.
There is my dog facts, great.
A lot of things there, cool.
So in this case,
we are now able to take an event,
map it into a promise from a fetch.
Map it back to response and
show it into the UI.
But this is great, there's a wonderful
API, assuming your server never goes down,
right, and
nothing bad happens on the internet.
So what do we do in that case, right?
We could, for instance, go ahead and
let's add a little bit of delay.
And so I in this case can modify
the API a little bit where I say delay.
Let's say it takes two seconds to respond.
And just to make things worse,
we can add this element of chaos
Where kind of two seconds,
roughly two seconds.
Cuz again, it's hard to simulate and
perfect network conditions if it's
always exactly two seconds slow.
But this is gonna kind of be
a little bit different in this case.
So we can go ahead and
open up the console,
just to kind of shrink that
down just a little bit.
So I can see the network requests, cool.
As you can see, I request a bunch of them.
They kind of come in and
they're kind of loading at different
points all over the place.
But these are random dog facts,
they're gonna get a sampling
of them no matter what.
What would I wanna use,
if I want to be like,
we're getting you some dog facts, relax.
We'll put them on the page when
we hear back from the API.
We're gonna ignore future
clicks until we're done.
>> Exhaust map.
>> Exhaust map, perfect.
So let's give that a shot.
So we'll just change this to an exhaust
map and we'll use that instead.
You see, I'm going nuts on that button,
but I only sent one network request.
When that network request comes back
I am welcome to hit the button again.
But RxJS will basically ignore clicks
until it's done doing what it's doing.
Random pop quiz, for
sure we all know the answer.
If I wanted to switch to the newest one,
what would I use instead?
>> Switch map.
>> Switch map,
switch map will be like I don't care
about the facts I just requested.
I want the new facts.
They're not real time or
anything, doesn't really matter.
So this case exhaust map is the right
choice for us at this moment.
Okay, so what happens if this fails?
We already have a slow API,
it's relatively possible
that this API could return an error,
right?
So we can make that happen.
We got another one called flakiness.
And a flakiness of 1 will
make it fail every time.
Flakiness of 2 will make
it fail every other time.
A flakiness of 3, do you get the point?
A flakiness of 3 omega every third time.
Let's have it fail all the time right now.
So if I just fire this off and
we should be able to see the console,
you can see that it blows up.
It doesn't know what to do.
We've got that 500 error.
Things are not great.
But we could do with that, right?
We could, we have an operator that
helps us deal with these things.
We saw that an observable
ends when it throws an error,
it's effectively the completion of that.
We knew we had a test for them.
We just haven't seen really
how to deal with them.
Sometimes it depends on the API, right?
It depends on what you wanna do.
Sometimes you wanna show them
an error message, right?
Sometimes you want to try again.
These are all fine things to do, but
you shouldn't just treat it
like everything worked out.
So what we can do in this case is we can
go ahead and we have a few options here.
Let's see, we could get a little
more nuanced here as well.
Let's go ahead and say because
fromfetch has an interesting behavior.
Fromfetch, if it gets a 400 or 500,
that's not a promise rejection, right?
Fromfetch, or fetch, rather,
the Fetch API as a whole only catches
if there's no network, right?
This is a fun progressive web app
thing which is you can handle
no internet different than flaky internet.
So let's go ahead, And we'll say,
You can do something like,
okay, if response is okay.
Then we return that.
Now we're using merge map.
So we do need to return
an observable no matter what, right?
So we couldn't do something like foo.
I do kinda like the node style.
This would not work because
with that switch map or
exhaust map it's expecting that
it gets an observable, right?
This promise it's gonna
turn into an observable.
This is just an object.
>> Could you just wrap it in an of?
>> Yep, [LAUGH] perfect.
Yeah, you wrap it in an of and
now it's an observable.
Cool, so
we've got that kind of error in place.
So that's one way to go ahead and do it.
And so now when we subscribe,
we could deal with that error separately.
There's another way to handle
this as we'll see in a second.
But let's start with this for
now where we could say the facts
can come through or the error.
We kind of almost handle
this like node JS style.
Where we could say, okay,
if there's an error,
Do I have a set or a helper?
Yeah, set error with
the error message Otherwise,
I'll just return this,
I don't have to do that.
I can say clear out all the facts
that were in there because we're just
kinda pending them before and we'll
say I think I have added facts, right?
So this is one way to handle it.
This is good for errors where
we want to do something with it.
We still haven't dealt with the idea of
what happens if just things go poorly, and
we kind of see that in
a little bit as well.
And it's one of the advantages
that we get from fetch as well,
which it will actually deal
with even bad states for us.
Let's try this out,
make sure I didn't mess anything up.
So you can see something went
wrong cuz occasionally the API.
This one that we still have it, flakiness
is set to 1, so it will always fail.
Versus if I set out to a 2,
it's expecting an object.
Fails on purpose, or
is delayed, and we get them.
All right, so
we can handle both situations.